---
layout: post
title: Weeks of August 1 and 8
---

On August 1st, I met with Nick to run the custom aligner on a series of scoring schemes and through a repair classifying software, HiFIBR. Since previous work done over the spring with a commercial aligner had also been run through HiFIBR, we could compare HiFIBR results in order to assess our custom aligner compared to the commercial tools, while also confirming that our output works with this downstream tool. 

For ease of testing, I designed the aligner such that it takes a scoring file and runs using the parameters specified there. But after running the aligner on several different schemes, it became clear that HiFIBR didn’t work as intended with the custom, quality-based scoring scheme. Using HiFIBR results as a baseline for comparison wouldn’t work. Further, we discovered that we needed to reach out to a collaborator to gain access to the full set of FASTA and FASTQ files for our data – files that, at the beginning of the summer, we had considered to be too far upstream in the analysis process to need. I had been working with a single set of FASTA/FASTQ files for my tests. 

Waiting for the full dataset gave me the time to regroup a bit – to do some more testing and think about the state of the project. Having this kind of “down time” proved critical. I wrote up a summary of the project status, analyzed my design decisions, and found a flaw. The standard Needleman-Wunsch algorithm requires keeping track of only one matrix; however, when we include the affine gap penalty, it requires keeping track of three. I set up a plan for the required design changes; I’ll put that into place in Week 10. For the next week and a half, I'll be taking a break while my younger sibling visits me in Boston.
